[Operator] Add Helm quickstart guide (#1079)
grafana/agent: docs/operator/helm-getting-started.md

+++
title = "Grafana Agent Operator Helm Quickstart"
weight = 110
+++
# Grafana Agent Operator Helm Quickstart

In this guide you'll learn how to deploy the [Grafana Agent Operator]({{< relref "./_index.md" >}}) into your Kubernetes cluster using the [grafana-agent-operator Helm chart](https://github.com/grafana/helm-charts/tree/main/charts/agent-operator). 

You'll then deploy the following custom resources (CRs):

- A `GrafanaAgent` resource, which discovers one or more `MetricsInstance` and `LogsInstances` resources.
- A `MetricsInstance` resource that defines where to ship collected metrics. Under the hood, this rolls out a Grafana Agent StatefulSet that will scrape and ship metrics to a `remote_write` endpoint.
- A `ServiceMonitor` resource to collect cAdvisor and kubelet metrics. Under the hood, this configures the `MetricsInstance` / Agent StatefulSet.
- A `LogsInstance` resource that defines where to ship collected logs. Under the hood, this rolls out a Grafana Agent DaemonSet that will tail log files on your cluster nodes.
- A `PodLogs` resource to collect container logs from Kubernetes Pods. Under the hood, this configures the`LogsInstance` / Agent DaemonSet.

> To learn more about the custom resources Operator provides, please consult [Operator architecture]({{< relref "./architecture.md" >}}).

Reviewer: Do we want to explain why the operator doesn't deploy any of the custom resources?

> > **Note:** Agent Operator is currently in beta and its custom resources are subject to change as the project evolves. It current supports the metrics and logs subsystems of Grafana Agent. Integrations and traces support is coming soon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** Agent Operator is currently in beta and its custom resources are subject to change as the project evolves. It currently supports the metrics and logs subsystems of Grafana Agent. Integrations and traces support is coming soon.
```

> By the end of this guide, you'll have deloyed Agent Operator into your cluster and will be scraping and shipping cAdvisor and kubelet metrics to a Prometheus-compatible metrics endpoint. You'll also be collecting and shipping your Pods' container logs to a Loki-compatible logs endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By the end of this guide, you'll have deloyed Agent Operator into your cluster and will be scraping and shipping cAdvisor and Kubelet metrics to a Prometheus-compatible metrics endpoint. You'll also be collecting and shipping your Pods' container logs to a Loki-compatible logs endpoint.
```

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, make sure that you have the following available to you:

- A Kubernetes cluster
- The `kubectl` command-line client installed and configured on your machine
- The `helm` command-line client installed and configured on your machine

## Step 1: Install Agent Operator Helm Chart

> In this step you'll install the [grafana-agent-operator Helm chart](https://github.com/grafana/helm-charts/tree/main/charts/agent-operator) into your Kubernetes cluster. This will install the latest version of Agent Operator and its [Custom Resource Definitions](https://github.com/grafana/agent/tree/main/production/operator/crds) (CRDs). By default the chart will also deploy a Service that allows you scrape kubelets using a `ServiceMonitor`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this step you'll install the [grafana-agent-operator Helm chart](https://github.com/grafana/helm-charts/tree/main/charts/agent-operator) into your Kubernetes cluster. This will install the latest version of Agent Operator and its [Custom Resource Definitions](https://github.com/grafana/agent/tree/main/production/operator/crds) (CRDs). By default the chart will configure the operator to maintain a Service that allows you scrape kubelets using a `ServiceMonitor`.
```

kind: GrafanaAgent
metadata:
  name: grafana-agent
  namespace: default
  labels:
    app: grafana-agent
spec:
  image: grafana/agent:v0.20.0
  logLevel: info
  serviceAccountName: grafana-agent
  metrics:
    instanceSelector:
      matchLabels:
        agent: grafana-agent-metrics
    externalLabels:
      cluster: cloud

  logs:
    instanceSelector:
      matchLabels:
        agent: grafana-agent-logs

---

apiVersion: v1
kind: ServiceAccount
metadata:
  name: grafana-agent
  namespace: default

---

apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: grafana-agent
rules:
- apiGroups:
  - ""
  resources:
  - nodes
  - nodes/proxy
  - nodes/metrics
  - services
  - endpoints
  - pods
  verbs:
  - get
  - list
  - watch
- apiGroups:
  - networking.k8s.io
  resources:
  - ingresses
  verbs:
  - get
  - list
  - watch
- nonResourceURLs:
  - /metrics
  - /metrics/cadvisor
  verbs:
  - get

---

apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRoleBinding
metadata:
  name: grafana-agent
roleRef:
  apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
  kind: ClusterRole
  name: grafana-agent
subjects:
- kind: ServiceAccount
  name: grafana-agent
  namespace: default
```

> This creates a ServiceAccount, ClusterRole, and ClusterRoleBinding for the GrafanaAgent resource. It also creates a GrafanaAgent resource and specifies an Agent image version. Finally, the GrafanaAgent resource specifies `MetricsInstance` and `LogsInstance` selectors. These search for MetricsInstances and LogsInstances in the same namespace with labels matching `agent: grafana-agent-metrics` and `agent: grafana-agent-logs`, respectively. It also sets a `cluster: cloud` label for all metrics shipped your Prometheus-compatible endpoint. You should change this label to your desired cluster name.

Reviewer: If it's not too much trouble, a diagram here explaining the hierarchy of discovered custom resources might be useful for readers.

In this step you'll roll out a MetricsInstance resource. MetricsInstance resources define a `remote_write` sink for metrics and configure one or more selectors to watch for creation and updates to `*Monitor` objects. These objects allow you to define Agent scrape targets via K8s manifests:

- [ServiceMonitors](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/master/Documentation/api.md#servicemonitor)
- [PodMonitors](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/master/Documentation/api.md#podmonitor)
- [Probes](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/master/Documentation/api.md#probe)

Roll out the following manifest into your cluster:

```
apiVersion: monitoring.grafana.com/v1alpha1
kind: MetricsInstance
metadata:
  name: primary
  namespace: default
  labels:
    agent: grafana-agent-metrics
spec:
  remoteWrite:
  - url: your_remote_write_URL
    basicAuth:
      username:
        name: primary-credentials-metrics
        key: username
      password:
        name: primary-credentials-metrics
        key: password

  # Supply an empty namespace selector to look in all namespaces. Remove

>   # this to only look in the same namespace.

Reviewer: I think the comments for the namespace selectors should be modified to say "same namesake as the MetricsInstance custom resource"

      sourceLabels:
      - __name__
    - action: replace
      targetLabel: job
      replacement: integrations/kubernetes/cadvisor
    path: /metrics/cadvisor
    port: https-metrics
    relabelings:
    - sourceLabels:
      - __metrics_path__
      targetLabel: metrics_path
    scheme: https
    tlsConfig:
      insecureSkipVerify: true
  namespaceSelector:
    matchNames:
    - default
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app.kubernetes.io/name: kubelet
```

> These two ServiceMonitors configure Agent to scrape all the kubelet and cAdvisor endpoints in your Kubernetes cluster (one of each per Node). In addition, it defines a `job` label which you may change (it is preset here for compatibility with Grafana Cloud's Kubernetes integration), and allowlists a core set of Kubernetes metrics to reduce remote metrics usage. If you don't need this allowlist, you may omit it, however note that your metrics usage will increase significantly. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These two ServiceMonitors configure Agent to scrape all the Kubelet and cAdvisor endpoints in your Kubernetes cluster (one of each per Node). In addition, it defines a `job` label which you may change (it is preset here for compatibility with Grafana Cloud's Kubernetes integration), and allowlists a core set of Kubernetes metrics to reduce remote metrics usage. If you don't need this allowlist, you may omit it, however note that your metrics usage will increase significantly. 
```

>  When you're done, Agent should now be shipping kubelet and cAdvisor metrics to your remote Prometheus endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 When you're done, Agent should now be shipping Kubelet and cAdvisor metrics to your remote Prometheus endpoint.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.grafana.com/v1alpha1
kind: LogsInstance
metadata:
  name: primary
  namespace: default
  labels:
    agent: grafana-agent-logs
spec:
  clients:
  - url: your_remote_logs_URL
    basicAuth:
      username:
        name: primary-credentials-logs
        key: username
      password:
        name: primary-credentials-logs
        key: password

  # Supply an empty namespace selector to look in all namespaces.
  podLogsNamespaceSelector: {}
  podLogsSelector:
    matchLabels:
      instance: primary
```

This LogsInstance will pick up PodLogs resources with the `instance: primary` label. Be sure to set the Loki URL to the correct push endpoint (for Grafana Cloud, this will be something like `logs-prod-us-central1.grafana.net/loki/api/v1/push`, however you should check the Cloud Portal to confirm). 

Also note that we are using the `agent: grafana-agent-logs` label here, which will associate this LogsInstance with the GrafanaAgent resource defined in Step 2. This means that it will inherit requests, limits, affinities and other properties defined in the GrafanaAgent custom resource. 

Create the Secret for the LogsInstance resource:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml
```

apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: primary-credentials-logs
  namespace: default
stringData:
  username: 'your_username_here'
  password: 'your_password_here'
```

> If you're using Grafana Cloud, you can find your hosted Loki endpoint username and password in the [Grafana Cloud Portal](https://grafana.com/profile/org ). You may wish to base64-encode these values. In this case, please use `data` instead of `stringData`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're using Grafana Cloud, you can find your hosted Loki endpoint username and password in the [Grafana Cloud Portal](https://grafana.com/profile/org). You may wish to base64-encode these values. In this case, please use `data` instead of `stringData`. 
```

Reviewer: Note that Kubernetes will automatically base64-encode the Secret when it's sent to the API. If you do a `kubectl get` after applying the secret, you'll see that it's already been encoded; `stringData` just exists as a convenience to the user.

Author: Gotcha, will change the language to "base64-encode these values yourself"

Finally, we'll roll out a PodLogs resource to define our logging targets. Under the hood, Agent Operator will turn this into Agent config for the logs subsystem, and roll it out to the DaemonSet of logging agents.

The following is a minimal working example which you should adapt to your production needs:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml
```

apiVersion: monitoring.grafana.com/v1alpha1
kind: PodLogs
metadata:
  labels:
    instance: primary
  name: kubernetes-pods
  namespace: default
spec:
  pipelineStages:
    - docker: {}
  namespaceSelector:
    matchNames:
    - default
  selector:
    matchLabels: {}
```

This tails container logs for all Pods in the `default` Namespace. You can restrict the set of Pods matched by using the `matchLabels` selector. You can also set additional `pipelineStages` and create `relabelings` to add or modify log line labels. To learn more about the PodLogs spec and available resource fields, please see the [PodLogs CRD](https://github.com/grafana/agent/blob/main/production/operator/crds/monitoring.grafana.com_podlogs.yaml).

Under the hood, the above PodLogs resource will generate the following Agent logs `scrape_configs`:

> ```

Reviewer: I think this section might be a little overwhelming. Do we want to just explain the labels that will be added to targets instead of showing the specific generated relabel configs?
